ARROW-17887: [R][Doc] Improve readability of the Get Started and README pages (#14514)
apache/arrow: r/vignettes/read_write.Rmd

output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
---

The arrow package provides functions for reading single data files into memory, in
several common formats. By default, calling any of these functions
returns an R data frame. To return an Arrow Table, set argument
`as_data_frame = FALSE`.

- `read_parquet()`: read a file in Parquet format
- `read_feather()`: read a file in the Apache Arrow IPC format (formerly called the Feather format)
- `read_delim_arrow()`: read a delimited text file (default delimiter is comma)
- `read_csv_arrow()`: read a comma-separated values (CSV) file
- `read_tsv_arrow()`: read a tab-separated values (TSV) file
- `read_json_arrow()`: read a JSON data file

For writing data to single files, the arrow package provides the
following functions, which can be used with both R data frames and 
Arrow Tables:

- `write_parquet()`: write a file in Parquet format
- `write_feather()`: write a file in Arrow IPC format
- `write_csv_arrow()`: write a file in CSV format

All these functions can read and write files in the local filesystem or
to cloud storage. For more on cloud storage support in arrow, see the [cloud storage article](./fs.html).

> The arrow package also supports reading and writing multi-file datasets,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The arrow package also supports reading larger-than-memory single data files, and reading and writing multi-file data sets.
```

> which enable analysis and processing of larger-than-memory data, and provide 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enables analysis and processing of larger-than-memory data, and provides 
```

---
title: "Reading and writing data files"
description: >
  Learn how to read and write CSV, Parquet, and Feather files with `arrow` 
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
---

The `arrow` package provides functions for reading single data files in
several common formats. By default, calling any of these functions
returns an R data frame. To return an Arrow Table, set argument

> `as_data_frame = FALSE`.

Reviewer 2: What do you think to the idea of mentioning in this paragraph that the file reader functions read things into memory?  I've been in a few discussions lately where it's been mentioned that the eager/lazy distinction for the `read_*()` functions as compared to `open_dataset()` is a more accurate one than single/multi-files (you can read in a single file via the datasets API), and whilst we haven't started pushing that narrative yet, here could be a good place to start?

Author: That's nice, I'll do that. @stephhazlitt had some suggestions about other places we can rephrase to emphasise the in-memory/on-disk distinction too

Reviewer 2: Great!  Steph mentioned earlier that you'd coined "in-memory vs. larger-than-memory" btw; I really like that!

- `read_parquet()`: read a file in Parquet format

> - `read_feather()`: read a file in the Apache Arrow IPC format (also called the Feather format)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `read_feather()`: read a file in the Apache Arrow IPC format (formerly called the Feather format)
```

```{r}
read_parquet(file_path, col_select = c("name", "height", "mass"))
```

R object attributes are preserved when writing data to Parquet or
Arrow/Feather files and when reading those files back into R. This enables
round-trip writing and reading of `sf::sf` objects, R data frames with
with `haven::labelled` columns, and data frame with other custom
attributes. To learn more about how metadata are handled in `arrow`, the [metadata article](./metadata.html).

## Arrow/Feather format

The Arrow file format was developed to provide binary columnar 
serialization for data frames, to make reading and writing data frames 
efficient, and to make sharing data across data analysis languages easy.
This file format is sometimes referred to as Feather because it is an
outgrowth of the original [Feather](https://github.com/wesm/feather) project 
that has now been moved into the Arrow project itself. You can find the 
detailed specification of version 2 of the Arrow format -- officially 
referred to as [the Arrow IPC file format](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#ipc-file-format) --

> on the Arrow specification page. 

Reviewer 2: I like the addition of this context for why it's no longer called Feather, but why it was.

The `write_feather()` function writes version 2 Arrow/Feather files by default, and supports multiple kinds of file compression. Basic use is shown below:

```{r}
file_path <- tempfile()
write_feather(starwars, file_path)
```

The `read_feather()` function provides a familiar interface for reading feather files:

```{r}
read_feather(file_path)
```

Like the Parquet reader, this reader supports reading a only subset of columns, and can produce Arrow Table output:

```{r}
read_feather(
  file = file_path, 
  col_select = c("name", "height", "mass"), 
  as_data_frame = FALSE
)
```

## CSV format

The read/write capabilities of the `arrow` package also include support for 
CSV and other text-delimited files. The `read_csv_arrow()`, `read_tsv_arrow()`, 
and `read_delim_arrow()` functions all use the Arrow C++ CSV reader to read 
data files, where the Arrow C++ options have been mapped to arguments in a 
way that mirrors the conventions used in `readr::read_delim()`, with a 

> `col_select` argument inspired by `vroom::vroom()`. 

Reviewer 2: Is it worth mentioning that for advanced usage, users can pass Arrow-specific arguments through in the `parse_options`, `read_options`, and `convert_options` parameters (or at least acknowledging that users have access to the Arrow-specific options even if not explicitly mentioning these parameters)?  (I'm anticipating that the answer to this question may well be 'no'!)

Although `read_csv_arrow()` currently has fewer parsing options for dealing 
with every CSV format variation in the wild than other CSV readers available
in R, for those files that it can read, it is often significantly faster than 
other R CSV readers, such as `base::read.csv`, `readr::read_csv`, and

> `data.table::fread`.

Reviewer 2: Lol, are we going there? :P

Author: I would prefer not to. It's another one where this copy is preserved from the existing docs (it's currently here: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/articles/arrow.html) and I personally think it's unwise. I don't think it helps the community to make benchmarking claims in the documentation. That feels like something to do elsewhere? I'd be very happy to delete this actually

Reviewer 2: Yeah, please let's ditch it!

Author: Okay, I've removed that paragraph

A simple example of writing and reading a CSV file with `arrow` is shown below:

```{r}
file_path <- tempfile()
write_csv_arrow(mtcars, file_path)
read_csv_arrow(file_path, col_select = starts_with("d"))
```

## JSON format

The `arrow` package supports reading (but not writing) of tabular data from line-delimited JSON, using the `read_json_arrow()` function. A minimal example is shown below:

```{r}
file_path <- tempfile()
writeLines('
    { "hello": 3.5, "world": false, "yo": "thing" }
    { "hello": 3.25, "world": null }
    { "hello": 0.0, "world": true, "yo": null }
  ', file_path, useBytes = TRUE)
read_json_arrow(file_path)
```

## Further reading

- To learn more about cloud storage, see the [cloud storage article](./fs.html).

> - To learn more about multi-file datasets, see the [datasets article](./dataset.html).

Reviewer 2: Perhaps link to cookbook chapters?

Author: Done
